           OUP CORRECTED PROOF – FINAL, 21/4/2020, SPi




Leibniz: Dissertation on
  Combinatorial Art
OUP CORRECTED PROOF – FINAL, 21/4/2020, SPi




            LEIBNIZ FROM OXFORD
         This series presents new translations of works by
           G. W. Leibniz with introductions and notes,
               for a broad philosophical readership.
           Leibniz: Dissertation on Combinatorial Art
        Translated with introduction and commentary by
       Massimo Mugnai, Han van Ruler, and Martin Wilson
                Leibniz: Discourse on Metaphysics
         Translated with introduction and commentary by
                    Gonzalo Rodriguez-Pereyra
                        OUP CORRECTED PROOF – FINAL, 21/4/2020, SPi




 Leibniz: Dissertation
on Combinatorial Art
  Translated with introduction and commentary by
  MASSIMO MUGNAI, HAN VAN RULER,
        AND MARTIN WILSON




                1
OUP CORRECTED PROOF – FINAL, 21/4/2020, SPi




                              3
                    Great Clarendon Street, Oxford, OX2 6DP,
                                United Kingdom
       Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford.
    It furthers the University’s objective of excellence in research, scholarship,
   and education by publishing worldwide. Oxford is a registered trade mark of
         Oxford University Press in the UK and in certain other countries
          © Massimo Mugnai, Han van Ruler, and Martin Wilson 2020
                The moral rights of the authors have been asserted
                          First Edition published in 2020
                                   Impression: 1
    All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in
    a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, without the
 prior permission in writing of Oxford University Press, or as expressly permitted
    by law, by licence or under terms agreed with the appropriate reprographics
  rights organization. Enquiries concerning reproduction outside the scope of the
  above should be sent to the Rights Department, Oxford University Press, at the
                                     address above
               You must not circulate this work in any other form
            and you must impose this same condition on any acquirer
      Published in the United States of America by Oxford University Press
      198 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10016, United States of America
                  British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
                                   Data available
                Library of Congress Control Number: 2019949395
                            ISBN 978–0–19–883795–4
                             Printed and bound by
                     CPI Group (UK) Ltd, Croydon, CR0 4YY
      Links to third party websites are provided by Oxford in good faith and
    for information only. Oxford disclaims any responsibility for the materials
           contained in any third party website referenced in this work.
                                      OUP CORRECTED PROOF – FINAL, 21/4/2020, SPi




                                Preface

History is bound to cherish the youthful work of a later genius, especially if
its themes anticipate those of masterpieces to come. In the case of Leibniz’s
Dissertatio de arte combinatoria (1666), however, scholarship has been
curiously reserved in dealing with this particular travail de jeunesse.
Although studies by such eminent Leibniz specialists as Louis Couturat
(1868–1914), Karl Dürr (1875–1928), and Eberhard Knobloch have added
much to the interpretation of Leibniz’s ﬁrst publication in print, a critical
edition of the Dissertatio has thus far been wanting, no doubt due to its
arduous phrasing, its wide-ranging subject matter, as well as its complex
overall theme.
    All of these factors make Leibniz’s De arte combinatoria (henceforth
DAC) a text that is not easy to edit. Working on the present edition,
moreover, the editors came across many further obscurities complicating
an annotated rendition of the work. Its mix of languages and subject matters
is only a minor hurdle in comparison to the strenuous way in which Leibniz
at times gives expression to the ideas contained in it, which, for instance,
may include descriptions in Latin of complex mathematical operations.
Another problem encountered was to ﬁnd the many texts by authors cited
in the DAC, a difﬁculty that was enhanced by Leibniz’s recurrent habit of
quoting authors indirectly—and on occasion incorrectly.
    The wealth of materials in De arte combinatoria and the dense argumen-
tation it contains did not impede Martin Wilson to work on an English
translation of the text over a period of many years, until he ﬁnally suggested
to prepare it for publication in the wake of the appearance of Arnold
Geulincx’s Ethics in 2006, a project on which he and Han van Ruler had
been working together.¹ Finding numerous puzzling details in Leibniz’s text
and a multitude of references unaccounted for in the extant secondary
literature, it would take Martin Wilson and Han van Ruler some further
years of textual and bibliographical investigations to come up with a rea-
sonably reliable translation. At this point, Massimo Mugnai joined Martin


  ¹ Geulincx (2006).
      OUP CORRECTED PROOF – FINAL, 21/4/2020, SPi




vi   

and Han and the project began to take the shape of an edition aiming not
only to satisfy the requirements of the inner circle of Leibniz’s scholars but a
larger spectrum of readers interested in Leibniz’s philosophy and the origins
of the combinatorial calculus in general. This implied not only the obvious
task of preparing an intelligible translation of the DAC, but even that of
explaining the many difﬁcult passages of the text. As a corollary to this task,
it became indispensable to ﬁnd all writings and authors mentioned by
Leibniz, some of them very obscure or almost unknown, and to equip the
text with a rich apparatus of footnotes.
   Thus, the annotated translation that lies before you is the product of a
collective enterprise in which Martin Wilson has been the principal trans-
lator of Leibniz’s text. Massimo Mugnai and Han van Ruler have revised and
edited the translation to produce the text as it now stands, and jointly
contributed to its annotation. Han has taken care of the largest part of the
footnotes, whereas Massimo, besides preparing the Latin version of the DAC
here included, has provided the main text with an Introduction, aiming to
situate in its historical context this early work of Leibniz and to present the
main results contained in it.
   In the process of the collaborative work on the project, Martin Wilson
was sadly found missing for a period, due to a stroke he suffered on 1 March,
2011. Though quickly regaining most of his colourful personality, Martin
has not been able to fully recover. The editors would like to express their
gratitude to Astley Nursing Home in Worcestershire, England, for the care
they have given Martin ever since, as well as to Barry Sweeting, who has been
acting as Martin’s representative and became a good friend.
   The editors are also grateful to Matthias Armgardt, Albrecht Heeffer,
Franco Montanari, Jan Papy, Horst Pfefferl, Wolfgang Schlosser, and
Andrew Weeks for their helpful comments on some questions of detail.
Richard Arthur, Vincenzo De Risi, Enrico Giusti, Enrico Pasini, and Monica
Ugaglia have read a ﬁrst draft of the Introduction, ﬁnding mistakes and
kindly suggesting amendments. A special word of thanks is due to Mariano
Giaquinta and Eberhard Knobloch for their generous advice on many
technical questions.
   Working on the annotation of the DAC during years in which there has
been a stupendous increase in the number of electronic sources available
online, Han van Ruler was nonetheless pleased to be helped by the coopera-
tive staff of a huge number of libraries still important for their treasures—
Leiden University Library, the Herzog August Bibliothek Wolfenbüttel, the
British Library, and the Bibliothèque Nationale de France in particular.
                                      OUP CORRECTED PROOF – FINAL, 21/4/2020, SPi




                                                                    vii

Besides expressing his debt to the staff of these and many other libraries, he
also wishes to thank Atsuko Fukuoka, Iqbal Faridi, and Peter Guttner, as
well as Patrick Masereel and Vincent de Keijzer for their hospitality in
Wolfenbüttel, London, and Paris over the years.
   Finally, the editors are grateful to Maria Rosa Antognazza and Paolo
Mancosu for their constant encouragement and to Peter Momtchiloff of
Oxford University Press, whose conﬁdence and dedication have given an
enormous spurt to the realization of this long-term project.

                                           Massimo Mugnai, Han van Ruler
                                                      Firenze and Leiden
OUP CORRECTED PROOF – FINAL, 21/4/2020, SPi
                                         OUP CORRECTED PROOF – FINAL, 21/4/2020, SPi




                          On this Edition

The Latin text here presented of Leibniz’s Dissertatio de arte combinatoria is
faithful to the original publication of the DAC (Leipzig: Fick and Seubold,
1666), the full title of which reads:

  Dissertatio De Arte Combinatoria, In qua Ex Arithmeticae fundamentis
  Complicationum ac Transpositionum Doctrina novis praeceptis extruitur,
  & usus ambarum per universum scientiarum orbem ostenditur; nova etiam
  Artis Meditandi, Seu Logicae Inventionis semina sparguntur. Praeﬁxa est
  Synopsis totius Tractatus, & additamenti loco Demonstratio Existentiae Dei
  ad Mathematicam certitudinem exacta.

In a new, ameliorated edition, the text of the DAC was reproduced by Carl
Immanuel Gerhardt (1816–99) in volume IV of his edition of Die philoso-
phische Schriften von Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz (Berlin: Weidmann, 1880 /
Hildesheim: Georg Olms, 1960), 27–104.
   In the text below, however, the reader will ﬁnd references in square
brackets (in bold) to the 1666 edition and also square brackets (in italics)
to the page numbers of the Akademie-edition of the DAC:

  Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz, Sämtliche Schriften und Briefe herausgegeben von
  der Deutschen Akademie der Wissenschaften zu Berlin, Sechste Reihe, Erster
  Band, Darmstadt: Reichl, 1930 / Berlin Akademie Verlag, 163–230.

In the translation here presented, Leibniz’s typography has been followed
almost literally, even if the structure of individual sentences has been
adapted in such ways as to yield a readable English text.
   In dealing with typos, omissions, miscalculations, and mistaken refer-
ences in the 1666 original, as well as with Leibniz’s recurrent inclusion of
Greek and German words into the Latin text, consistency in referring to
these has not been an aim in itself. Obvious editorial interventions will be
marked by the use of square brackets in the text of the translation.
   In choosing case by case whether simply to copy the original or to make
editorial interventions, it has been the editors’ intention to offer an intuitively
      OUP CORRECTED PROOF – FINAL, 21/4/2020, SPi




x     

understandable account of what the author must have had in mind. Latin text,
translation, and annotations will hopefully provide the reader with sufﬁcient
materials to do the same and reconstruct the mathematical and philosophical
objectives Leibniz set himself when writing the DAC.
   As far as the editors know, besides the present edition there is only
one entire translation of the DAC into a modern language: G. W. Leibniz,
Dissertación de arte combinatoria, translated by Manuel A. Correia, in
G. W. Leibniz, Obras ﬁlosóﬁcas y cientiﬁcas. Escritos Matemáticos, (ed.)
Mary Sol de Mora Charles (Granada: Editorial Comares), 2015, vol. 7B,
547–643. A previous translation into Catalan was edited, again by Manuel
Correia, in 1992.


                               Quotation marks

In what follows, double quotation marks have generally been used for
quotations, and single quotation marks for highlighting (the use of ) speciﬁc
concepts or expressions. Double quotation marks, however, may occasion-
ally also point out odd or unusual expressions.
   In the footnotes, double quotation marks are also used for quotations in
Latin, but quotations of Latin verse and references to (the use of) Latin
concepts and expression are generally given in italics.
   Finally, Leibniz himself uses double quotation marks to indicate the
solutions he offers to the problems dealt with in the DAC—a custom that
the editors have chosen to copy in the translation.


                                   References

Next to page number references (after ‘:’) and references to volumes (‘vol.’,
‘vols’), the reader will also ﬁnd references to the signature marks (‘sig.’, ‘sigg.’),
which are found especially in the front matter of early-modern prints, as well as,
where applicable, to columns rather than pages (‘col.’, ‘cols’).


                                 Abbreviations

A list of bibliographical abbreviations and abbreviated titles for
reference works occurring in the notes to both the Introduction and the
Translation of the DAC, may be found in sections A. (Leibniz Works) and
D. (Abbreviations) of the Bibliography, pp. 287 and 301–2, below.
                                 OUP CORRECTED PROOF – FINAL, 21/4/2020, SPi




                          Contents

Introduction                                                        1
A Dissertation on Combinatorial Art                               58
Text and Translation                                              62

Bibliography                                                     287
Index                                                            303
OUP CORRECTED PROOF – FINAL, 21/4/2020, SPi
                                              OUP CORRECTED PROOF – FINAL, 28/4/2020, SPi




                                Introduction

                 1 The project for the ‘characteristic art’

Leibniz was twenty years old when the Dissertation on Combinatorial Art
(henceforth DAC) was ﬁrst published. As he would later write: “the booklet
was composed when the author was still young, in the year 1665, and was
edited at Leipzig in the year 1666”.¹ The work expanded the text of a
dissertation he had defended earlier that same year at the Leipzig Faculty
of Philosophy, aiming for a university position. This ﬁrst embryonic form of
the Dissertation was entitled Disputatio Arithmetica de complexionibus
(‘Arithmetical Disputation on Complexions’) and contained the ﬁrst part
of the 1666 work, from Cum Deo (“With God’s Help”) through to the end of
section 8 of the ﬁrst problem.²
   At the time, Leibniz was not particularly well trained in mathematics, as
he was to admit later on the occasion of a re-edition of the DAC. When,
indeed, the DAC was published again without the author’s permission by the
Frankfurt book dealer Cröker in 1690, this provoked a reaction on Leibniz’s
part, who wrote a short notice in the Acta Eruditorum.³ As he writes there,
the booklet was “not sufﬁciently polished” and no longer agreed with the
ideas he held “at present” (1691). Moreover, the book left something to be
desired:

    . . . some problems concerning numbers could have been solved in a far
   better way and the solutions are susceptible of more accurate proofs. At the
   time, indeed, [the author] had only a vague idea of higher mathematics and
   thus, unaware of the discoveries of others and not sufﬁciently acquainted


   ¹ GP 4: 103. The original (see below, note 4) has ‘1668’.
   ² Cf. A VI, 1: 170–5. The Arithmetical Disputation included four more corollaries (A VI, 1:
228–30). The entire title of the Arithmetical Disputation was: Disputatio Arithmetica de Com-
plexionibus, Quam in Illustri Academia Lipsiensi Indultu Amplissimae Facultatis Philosophicae
pro loco in ea obtinendo prima vice habebit M. Gotifredus Guilielmus Leibnuzius Lipsiensis,
J. U. Baccal. D. 7. Martii Anno 1666. H. L. Q. C. Lipsiae, Literis Sporelianis.
   ³ Cf. Knobloch (1974: 412).
       OUP CORRECTED PROOF – FINAL, 28/4/2020, SPi




2    

    with mathematical analysis, he was able to produce something of his own
    on the basis of a hasty reﬂection ( . . . )⁴

Despite this, however, Leibniz also notes that “the booklet” contains “many
new meditations” that he does not regret, concerning the “art of discovery”
(ars inveniendi) and the “excellent” idea of an alphabet of human thoughts.
   The ‘art of discovery’ and the alphabet of human thoughts are two issues
strongly connected with one another. They both pertain to the discipline of
logic, for which Leibniz manifested a genuine interest from an early age
onwards. According to an autobiographical passage included in a text prob-
ably written in the year 1682, Leibniz, when he was “not yet twelve”, was
ﬁlling “sheets of paper with wonderful meditations about logic, attempting
to overcome the subtleties of the scholastics.”⁵ In the same vein, in a text
composed during the years 1683–5, he writes:

    As a boy I learned logic, and having already developed the habit of digging
    more deeply into the reasons for what I was taught, I raised the following
    question with my teachers. Seeing that there are categories for the simple
    terms by which concepts are ordered, why should there not also be
    categories for complex terms, by which truths may be ordered? I was
    then unaware that geometricians do this very thing when they demonstrate
    and order propositions according to their dependence upon each other. It
    seemed to me however that this could be achieved universally if we ﬁrst
    had the true categories for simple terms and if, to obtain these, we set up
    something new in the nature of an alphabet of thoughts, or a catalogue of
    the highest genera or of those we assume to be highest, such as a, b, c, d, e, f,
    out of whose combination inferior concepts may be formed.⁶

Later on, the idea of building an ‘alphabet of thoughts’ evolved into a very
complex project, which remained a central topic among Leibniz’s philo-
sophical interests until the end of his life: the composition of a ‘universal
characteristic’, or ‘characteristic art’ (ars characteristica).
  The Latin word character has the same meaning as the English words
‘mark’, ‘sign’; and with the expression ars characteristica, Leibniz refers to


   ⁴ Leibniz’s notice was published in the Acta Eruditorum (Leipzig) of the year 1691 (pp. 63–4,
cf. GP 4: 103–4) and has been recently republished in Leibniz, Essais, vol. III: 995–6.
   ⁵ GP 7: 126. For “the age of twelve”, see what G. H. Parkinson writes in Logical Papers, p. x, n. 4,
where, relying on Fischer-Kabitz (1920: 712), he considers it an exaggeration on Leibniz’s part.
   ⁶ L: 229 (A VI, 4: 538).
                                             OUP CORRECTED PROOF – FINAL, 28/4/2020, SPi




                                ‘ ’                     3

a system of symbols denoting concepts and propositions, on which one
may operate according to certain rules to discover new truths and to ﬁnd
proofs for the old ones. To construct the characteristic, two fundamental
steps were needed: 1) performing an analysis of all human concepts, so that
we may have a complete list of all simple concepts; 2) recombining the
simple concepts, thus generating all possible complex concepts and all
possible truths. Step (1) requires that we dispose of a general inventory of
all known concepts and truths, and this motivated Leibniz to plan a further
step: 3) the construction of a general encyclopedia of human knowledge.
Leibniz’s optimistic project is that of analysing each complex concept in its
component parts, until we reach the simple, primitive ones. At the ﬁrst stage
of the project, clearly witnessed by the DAC, Leibniz takes for granted (in
accordance with the Lullist tradition) that we human beings could attain the
ﬁrst, simple concepts corresponding to the properties of God. Later on,
however, around 1686, Leibniz states that, even though we cannot reach
the simple concepts, we may stop our analysis at a certain point and consider
as simple, i.e. primitive, those concepts that we cannot further analyse. Thus,
in this case the simple concepts are simple for us, not absolutely.⁷
    Once the encyclopedia were constructed, however, the problem would
still remain of ﬁnding the rules to perform the analysis and re-combination
of the concepts; and it is for this reason that Leibniz adds another stage to
the previous ones: 4) the constitution of the so-called ‘general science’
(scientia generalis).
    Leibniz thinks of the general science in terms of a very abstract discipline,
i.e. as a kind of ‘meta-science’, which was to investigate the various methods
and procedures (deductive and inductive, logical and empirical) internal to
each scientiﬁc ﬁeld and displayed by people involved in their respective
research activities. Of course, the study of logic would play a pre-eminent
role in this general science and it is therefore no wonder that Leibniz, in the
period from 1676 to 1690, developed a series of essays on the logical
calculus. These essays were aimed at ﬁnding the general rules and principles
governing any kind of logical inference, and may be considered as the ﬁrst
successful attempt, in Western culture, to develop an algebraic treatment of
logic before George Boole’s seminal work.⁸


  ⁷ Cf., for instance, A VI, 4A: 742, 746, 964.
  ⁸ Boole (1847). On Leibniz’s logical writings and Boolean algebras, see Castañeda (1990);
Swoyer (1994); Lenzen (2004); Mugnai (2010); Malink-Vasudevan (2016), and the debate
between Mugnai and Malink-Vasudevan (2017).
      OUP CORRECTED PROOF – FINAL, 28/4/2020, SPi




4   

   Almost in the same period as his inquiries on logical calculus, Leibniz
applied himself to the task of determining the main features of the so-called
‘rational grammar’ (grammatica rationalis), which, according to his inten-
tions, should constitute a fundamental tool toward the construction of a
‘universal language’.
   In some texts, Leibniz seems to identify ‘universal language’ and ‘charac-
teristic art’: he models the characteristic on the example of a natural lan-
guage based on a grammar reduced to its essential elements. In general,
however, Leibniz thinks of the construction of a universal language as a step
toward the constitution of the universal characteristic, which, as we have
seen, presupposes a large-scale program with lots of elements besides the
universal language, including the encyclopedia, the general science, the
logical calculus, etc.
   If we compare what Leibniz writes in the DAC with the project for the
characteristic art as it emerges in the years following his stay in Paris (March
1672–October 1676), it is not difﬁcult to ﬁnd in the 1666 work many seeds of
the future developments. From the DAC, indeed, the project for the char-
acteristic art inherits the following, fundamental ideas:

    1) An analysis of concepts is needed to reach the ﬁrst, simple concepts;
    2) By means of a synthetic procedure, complementary to that of
       analysis, all possible complex concepts may be derived out of the
       simple ones;
    3) The process of synthesis can be performed by combining the concepts,
       simple and complex, on the basis of the rules of logic;
    4) If we assign to each simple concept a symbol of an alphabet, we may
       unambiguously represent in symbolic form any complex concept
       whatsoever;
    5) Given that any elementary truth can be expressed combining two
       concepts corresponding, respectively, to a subject and a predicate, the
       process of combining the simple concepts will generate all possible
       truths, constituting the basis of the art of discovery;
    6) If we employ numbers to represent concepts, we may make logical
       inferences simply operating on numbers, as in an arithmetical calcu-
       lus, instead of operating directly on concepts.

To appreciate the novelty and originality of Leibniz’s project, as it is
articulated in the DAC, however, we have to dwell a little on the cultural
background against which these ideas were conceived.
                                                 OUP CORRECTED PROOF – FINAL, 28/4/2020, SPi




                                     ‘’                             5

   2 ‘Lullism’ in the seventeenth century: art of memory and
       ﬁrst steps towards the creation of an encyclopedia

In the ﬁrst half of the ﬁfteenth century, humanists strongly reacted against
scholasticism in general and to scholastic logic in particular, which they
tended to consider as a discipline emblematic of a philosophical attitude that
was preoccupied primarily with frivolous topics and exclusively devoted to
produce sophistries. With the rediscovery of the works of Euclid and the
publication of texts by authors of late antiquity such as Heron of Alexandria
and Pappus, the standard of rigorous reasoning ceased to be identiﬁed with
Aristotle’s Organon.
   This does not mean, however, that, during the middle ages, Euclid’s
Elements were unknown. In the ﬁrst half of the twelfth century Adelard of
Bath translated into Latin an Arabic manuscript of the Elements. Adelard’s
edition was followed by several other translations made from Arabic sources
and by the translation made by Gerardo da Cremona. In the thirteenth
century, Campano da Novara prepared a text of Euclid’s work, which was
later employed by Luca Pacioli and Nicolò Tartaglia for their editions.
Medieval commentaries on the Elements, however, with the exception of
those belonging to the Arabic tradition, were usually quite poor. In the
second half of the sixteenth century, the Elements were translated into
modern languages.⁹ In the same period, Greek manuscripts began to circu-
late in Europe and Bartolomeo Zamberti translated the Elements into Latin
directly from the Greek (1505), thus opening a new era in the philological
reception of the text. In 1533 Simon Grynaeus published the editio princeps
of the Greek text. In this sense it seems proper to speak of a ‘rediscovery’ of
Euclid in the Western World.¹⁰
   Books on logic from the ﬁfteenth and sixteenth century often expressed
the need to develop old-fashioned logical matters according to the method
followed by mathematicians. In the introduction to his treatise on logic (ﬁrst
published in 1492), Girolamo Savonarola (1452–98), for example, criticizes
the obscurity that characterized the traditional way of teaching logic and
states that he aims to offer a synthesis of the entire dialectic ‘according to
the usual practice of mathematicians’.¹¹ Thus, it is no wonder that Jacob

   ⁹ Into Italian (1543), German (1562), French (1564), English (1570), Spanish (1576), and
Dutch (1606).
  ¹⁰ See De Risi (2016).
  ¹¹ Savonarola (1982: 3) complains that many people abstain from studying logic because of
the intrinsic difﬁculties of the discipline, “the obscurity of Aristotle’s books and the sophistries
       OUP CORRECTED PROOF – FINAL, 28/4/2020, SPi




6   

Pelletier (1515–82), more than ﬁfty years after Savonarola’s logic, in his
introduction to the Latin translation of the Elements (1557),¹² writes that
“every proof which leads us to truth is geometrical in character”, and
that “we are not able to distinguish the true from the false if we have not
previously been well acquainted with Euclid.”¹³ From the beginning of the
sixteenth century onwards, even though in many cases logic continued to
be taught along traditional lines, authors on the subject of logic start raising
the issue of its relationships with mathematics.
   In antiquity and in medieval times, logic and mathematics had been
considered as two quite independent disciplines.¹⁴ Even though it is prob-
able that Aristotle elaborated his theory of syllogisms drawing inspiration
from contemporary ideas in mathematics, and even though Stoic arguments
were employed by later commentators to justify certain theorems in Euclid’s
Elements, the idea of reducing logic to a calculus seems to have been
conceived for the ﬁrst time in the period between the second half of the
sixteenth and the ﬁrst half of the seventeenth century.¹⁵ Pierre de la Ramée
(1515–72), for instance, claims that the Greek word for ‘syllogism’ properly
means a calculus or a computation and Thomas Hobbes in his Computatio
sive Logica plainly identiﬁes the act of thinking with that of performing an
addition or a subtraction: “By ratiocination, I mean computation. Now, to
compute is either to collect the sum of many things that are added together,
or to know what remains when one thing is taken out of another. Ratiocin-
ation, therefore, is the same with addition and subtraction.”¹⁶ Clearly,
Hobbes’s idea that logical operations simply amount to adding or subtract-
ing concepts, was too naïve to permit any interesting development in the
direction of a logical calculus. Yet, the claim that reasoning is the same as
computing was quite new and invited people to create stronger relationships
between logic, understood as the discipline which dictates the canon for
correct reasoning, and mathematics.


and obscurity” which afﬂict the language of (scholastic) logicians. To these he opposes the
clarity and simplicity to which mathematicians are accustomed. This contraposition is typical of
the humanist thinkers and, as far as I know, there is no trace of it in logic handbooks written
before the ﬁfteenth century.

  ¹² The translation concerned the ﬁrst six books only.
  ¹³ Pelletier (1557: 12).     ¹⁴ Cf. Muller (1981); Acerbi (2010: 15–86).
  ¹⁵ On the relationships between logic and mathematics in the seventeenth century, see
Mugnai (2010).
  ¹⁶ Hobbes (1839a: 3). We ﬁnd an analogous claim concerning syllogism in Gassendi (1658,
vol. 1: 34).
                                              OUP CORRECTED PROOF – FINAL, 28/4/2020, SPi




                                  ‘’                         7

   Another important consequence of re-introducing Euclid’s works in
Western culture was that together with these works even some ancient
commentaries on the Elements (like Pappus’s commentary, for instance;
fourth century ), were to become widely known. Relying on Pappus, the
astronomer and mathematician Christopher Clavius (1538–1612) accord-
ingly contributed to an increasing interest in the distinction between ana-
lysis and synthesis among philosophers and mathematicians.¹⁷
   Roughly speaking, given a certain mathematical problem, analysis was
usually described as a method for going backwards from the problem to
some general principles that were involved in it and which could constitute a
basis for ﬁnding a solution. Synthesis was the opposite: from the principles to
the solution. Analysis was intended as a kind of heuristic process, whereas
synthesis was devised as a method for proving theorems starting from ﬁrst
principles and axioms. Thus, analysis and synthesis were viewed as two
essential tools for the project of renewing logic both as an art of judgment
(ars iudicandi) and as an art of discovery (ars inveniendi).
   The processes of analysis and synthesis played an essential role in
another project characterizing the cultural climate at the beginning of
the seventeenth century: the project of the creation of a universal language.
This project, in turn, was linked to the old tradition of so-called Lullism,
from the medieval thinker Ramon Lull (1232–1316), who is credited as a
founding father of combinatory and as a source for Leibniz’s ideas on
combinatorial art.¹⁸
   In his Ultimate General Art (Ars Magna, 1305), Ramon Lull proposes a
program the main features of which may be summarized as follows. Once
you have the ﬁrst concepts, which he believes are nine in number and
correspond to the properties of God (Goodness, Power, Wisdom, Truth,
Glory, etc.), Lull proposes the construction of a machinery composed by
concentric discs of paper rotating around a rigid axle. Each disc (properly a
circle) is divided into nine sectors and in each sector a letter is typed
representing a concept. The outer disc is ﬁxed and contains the letters
representing the ﬁrst concepts from the combination of which all others
are generated. The inner circles, which contain letters of other general
concepts, different from those corresponding to the divine properties, may
each revolve in opposite direction with respect to the others. Moving the
inner circles and keeping the outer one ﬁxed, the ‘artist’, i.e. the expert or


  ¹⁷ For the development of the concept of analysis in Western philosophy, see Beaney (2016).
  ¹⁸ On Lull’s art and logic, see Bonner (2007).
       OUP CORRECTED PROOF – FINAL, 28/4/2020, SPi




8   

master of the art, could create all possible combinations of the letters printed
in the sectors. With two circles, he might give rise to all possible combin-
ations of two letters; with three circles to all possible combinations of three
letters, etc. Lull’s idea was that using this device systematically, one could
reproduce all complex concepts of all created things.¹⁹ Lull considered the
General Art as a tool for producing true knowledge and believed that simply
manipulating a few discs of paper and combining their inscribed letters
one could discover new truths in every ﬁeld of human knowledge. His
aim was that of creating a general theory of the principles of all sciences: a
kind of ‘science of all sciences’, the nature of which was not merely formal
and which situated itself in a terrain intermediate between logic and
metaphysics.²⁰
   Starting from the second half of the sixteenth century, a renewed interest
in Lullism was largely motivated by the reaction against traditional ways of
teaching (Aristotelian) scholastic logic. The latter seemed too formal and too
remote from real life to be of any interest, whereas the Lullian Art, which
appeared to be playing with concepts of real properties and was hunting for
truths concerning real beings, was more promising in the eyes of people who
attempted to give a practical orientation to philosophy.


      3 The project for the creation of a universal language

As we have seen, Lull employed letters of the Latin alphabet to represent
concepts, but other signs or characters could also be invented to denote the
‘primitive concepts’. One can, for instance, devise some set of particularly
simple signs, easy to be manipulated and remembered, and then generate,
according to certain rules, the complex conﬁgurations corresponding to all
complex concepts. In this way, each concept could be associated with a kind
of ‘picture’, explicitly representing the degree of complexity of the concept
itself. This latter is a typical example of what, at the beginning of the
seventeenth century was considered a project for the construction of a
universal language. The connection with the Art of Ramon Lull was not a
necessary requisite for the project: many authors, however, were driven to
associate the two because of contingent analogies, mainly grounded on the


  ¹⁹ This is a quite simpliﬁed account of Lull’s art: for a more accurate explanation, see Bonner
(2007).
  ²⁰ Cf. Bonner (2007: 127) and Chapter 5 in particular.
                                             OUP CORRECTED PROOF – FINAL, 28/4/2020, SPi




                                              9

recourse to the methods of analysis and synthesis. This is the case, for
example, with Seth Ward (1617–89), Savilian Professor of astronomy at
Oxford, who had an interest in Lull’s theories and gave a very clear expos-
ition of the project for a universal language:

   [ . . . ] for all Discourses being resolved in sentences, those into words,
   words signifying either simple notions or being resolvable into simple
   notions, it is manifest, that if all the sorts of simple notions be found
   out, and have Symbols assigned to them, those will be extremely few in
   respect of the other, (which are indeed Characters of words, such as Tullius
   Tiro’s)²¹ the reason of their composition easily known, and the most com-
   pounded ones at once will be comprehended, and yet will represent to the
   very eye all the elements of their composition, and so deliver the natures
   of things: and exact discourses may be made demonstratively without any
   other pains than is used in the operations of specious Analytics.²²

‘Specious analytics’ (analytica speciosa) is a name also employed by
Leibniz in the DAC to designate the algebra introduced by François Viète
(1540–1605); the term speciosa, a derivation of species, alluding to the
possibility of dealing simultaneously with several things of the same kind.
As Seth Ward stresses, the creation of a universal language requires ﬁrst that
we are able to decompose our complex concepts into their component parts.
To execute this task, however, we need something like a register of all (or at
least of the most important) complex concepts. Once this register was ready,
it would contain the greatest part of human knowledge all at once. It is from
this idea that the project for the construction of an encyclopedia took its
origin, an encyclopedia that would contain the entire knowledge acquired by
human beings in the course of the centuries. Thus, in the period considered,
Lullism, the search for a universal language and the project for constructing
an encyclopedia were three different, but fairly interconnected subjects,
pursued by a considerable number of philosophers in Europe. Amongst
these, Johann Heinrich Alsted (1588–1638), the celebrated author of a huge
encyclopedia in seven volumes (Herborn 1630), and an author well-known
to the young Leibniz, played a very inﬂuential role.²³

  ²¹ Marcus Tullius Tiro (ﬁrst century ) was ﬁrst a slave and then a freeman of Cicero who
invented the ‘Tironian notes’, the ﬁrst Latin shorthand system.
  ²² Ward (1654: 21).
  ²³ On Alsted’s inﬂuence on the young Leibniz, see Loemker (1961); Mugnai (1973). For an
exhaustive account of the relationships between Alsted and Leibniz on matters related to
       OUP CORRECTED PROOF – FINAL, 28/4/2020, SPi




10    

   As Alsted writes in his Clavis Artis Lullianae et verae logicae (A Key for the
Lullian Art and the True Logic, 1609), Lullism was poorly represented in
Germany at the time, whereas it was ﬂourishing in Spain, France, and Italy.
In Italy, in particular, many philosophers (here called speculatores, ‘specu-
lators’) applied themselves intensively to the study of this art, becoming a
kind of addict to it in the course of doing so.²⁴ Alsted calls Ramon Lull “a
mathematician and a cabbalist”²⁵ and praises him for the use of letters of the
alphabet to denote concepts, as well as for his recourse to mathematical
symbols like circles. He considers the former as valid aids to memory and
the latter as tools on which the teaching of any science is based.²⁶
   In comparison with other texts devoted to the same topic (Bruno’s works
included), Alsted’s Clavis constitutes a rare example of clarity and concise-
ness: it gives a terse account of how Lull’s art works and weds the Lullian
combinatory with some features borrowed from the reformed logic pro-
posed by Pierre de la Ramée (1515–72), thereby giving rise to a logical
system mainly oriented at the development of topical arguments, i.e. argu-
ments conceived with the purpose of ruling dialectical disputes.²⁷


                         4 Atomism and ‘immeation’

Compared with the works of authors belonging to the tradition of Lullism,
the DAC differentiates itself ﬁrst of all because of the emphasis put on the
theory of syllogism, then for the attempt to extend the combinatorial
calculus to any kind of matter. Finally, even though Leibniz’s mathematical
training was not very developed at the time, an intense mathematical ﬂavour
that can hardly be found among the followers of Ramon Lull emanates from
the DAC.
   According to the image of the world that we get reading the DAC,
everything having a complex structure is a whole which can be decomposed
into lesser wholes and these latter, in turn, into their least components parts


religion, see Antognazza-Hotson (1999); on Alsted’s encyclopaedism and the ‘second Reforma-
tion’ in Germany, see Hotson (2000). On Lullism, the encyclopedic projects and the universal
language, see Rossi (2006).

  ²⁴ Alsted (1609: 19).       ²⁵ Alsted (1609: 20).
  ²⁶ Alsted (1609: 21). For a further development of the doctrine, the reader of the Clavis is
invited to consult the commentaries to the Art written by Giordano Bruno.
  ²⁷ On the relationships between Ramus’s doctrines and the Herborn encyclopedists (on
Ramus’s philosophy in general), see Ong (2004).
                                         OUP CORRECTED PROOF – FINAL, 28/4/2020, SPi




                                                ‘’             11

(atoms or some molecular aggregates of some sort). By a simple process of
the combination of the parts, one may, in turn, re-compose the whole. The
same procedure can be applied to non-material things as well: to concepts,
for example, propositions, geometrical ﬁgures, and numbers. Thus, combin-
atory applied to mereology, the doctrine of wholes and parts, becomes a kind
of all-purpose tool in Leibniz’s hands; a tool that allows one to reveal the
intimate secrets of nature:

  Since all things that exist, or can be thought, may be said to be made up of
  parts, either real or at least conceptual, whatever differs in kind must
  necessarily differ either in parts, and here lie the Applications of Complex-
  ions, or by a different situs, hence the application of Dispositions.²⁸

The system of variations elaborated in the DAC, Leibniz observes, “leads the
mind that yields to it almost through all inﬁnity, and embraces at once the
harmony of the world, the inner workings of things, and the series of
forms.”²⁹ Introducing the seventh specimen, devoted to the application of
combinatory to geometrical ﬁgures, Leibniz emphatically writes:

  With these complications, not only can geometry be enriched by an inﬁnite
  number of new Theorems, as every complication brings into being a new,
  compound ﬁgure, by the contemplation of whose properties we may devise
  new theorems and new demonstrations; but (if it is indeed true that great
  things are made up of little things, whether you call them atoms or
  molecules) we also have a unique way of penetrating into the arcana of
  nature. This is because the more one has perceived of the parts of a thing,
  the parts of its parts, and their shapes and arrangements, the more
  perfectly one can be said to know the thing. The structure of these ﬁgures
  is ﬁrst to be investigated abstractly, in plane and solid geometry: after
  which, when you enter upon natural history and the question of being,
  that is, upon the question of the real constitution of bodies, the vast
  portals of Physics will stand open, and the character of the elements, the
  origin and mixture of the qualities, the origin of mixtures, the mixing of
  those mixtures, and everything that formerly lay hidden in darkness will
  be revealed.³⁰



  ²⁸ DAC: 93 (A VI, 1: 177).    ²⁹ DAC: 133 (A VI, 1: 187).
  ³⁰ DAC: 135 (A VI, 1: 187).
        OUP CORRECTED PROOF – FINAL, 28/4/2020, SPi




12     

Later in life, Leibniz would come back to the fact that, for a brief period in
his youth, he had favoured atomism. That he had done so, is quite in
agreement with the parenthetical remark made in the passage above,
which shows no prejudice against atoms as the least components of natural
bodies.³¹ Leibniz’s atomism, however, is wedded in the DAC with a meta-
physical doctrine centered on the notion of immeation or perichoresis,
according to which everything is related with everything on the basis of
the two relations of similarity and dissimilarity. ‘Perichoresis’ is the trans-
literation into English of a Greek word meaning ‘circle’ or the effect of
revolving, which was employed in theology “to explain the relation of
‘coherence’ of the three persons of the Trinity”.³² The Latin word ‘immeatio’
was coined to translate ‘perichoresis’ and according to Johann Heinrich
Bisterfeld, Leibniz’s main source on this issue, it was meant to designate
“the varied concourse, combination and complication of relations”.³³ In the
DAC, Leibniz praises Bisterfeld’s work:

     I shall ﬁnally and brieﬂy summon everything that can be culled from the
     metaphysical doctrine of the relations of Being to Being in order to form
     Places out of the different kinds of relation, and appropriate maxims
     characteristic of each of them, out of the theorems. I believe that I have
     seen this done, in more than just the summary fashion of encyclopaedists,
     by Johann Heinrich Bisterfeld in his Universal Lamp, or Epitome of the Art
     of Meditating, published in Leiden, 1657, which is entirely based on what
     he calls immeation and perichoresis, that is to say, the universal likeness
     of all things in all things, as well as the universal unlikeness of all things to
     all things, the principles of which are Relations. Anyone who reads that
     book will gain an increasing understanding of how to apply the art of
     complication.³⁴

Thus, Leibniz deeply modiﬁes the account of the world usually associated
with atomistic doctrine, which was based on the aggregation and disaggre-
gation of atoms governed by mere chance, without any trace of intrinsic

  ³¹ On Leibniz’s atomism, see Garber (2009: 62–70, 81–2); Arthur (2016).
  ³² Antognazza (1999: 50).
  ³³ Bisterfeld (1657a; 185–6) (Antognazza’s translation; Cf. Antognazza (1999: 50)). As Maria
Rosa Antognazza remarks, Bisterfeld, in his recognition of the universal analogy with Trinity,
“was certainly not alone. Rather he was working within a long tradition rooted in Augustinian
thought.” Ideas similar to those of Bisterfeld are to be found in Alsted and in “that other and still
more illustrious student of Alsted: Jan Amos Comenius.” (Antognazza 1999: 52).
  ³⁴ DAC: 70.
                                                OUP CORRECTED PROOF – FINAL, 28/4/2020, SPi




                ’                                   13

ﬁnalism. To this view he substitutes the picture of a world composed of
beings connected by a net of reciprocal relations that generate a mutual
union and communion analogous to that of the three persons in the holy
Trinity. This picture was clearly meant to avoid the materialistic and
atheistic consequences implicit in genuine atomistic theories as, for example,
the view displayed by Lucretius in his poem On the nature of things. It is not
difﬁcult to see the existence of a latent conﬂict between Leibniz’s acceptance
of atomism on the one hand, and his agreement to a metaphysics motivated
by religious issues and inﬂuenced by a philosophy largely inspired by
doctrines of Neo-platonic origins on the other.³⁵ As soon as the conﬂict
came to light, in the years immediately following the edition of the DAC,
Leibniz decided to abandon the atomistic theory, but in a certain sense he
never stopped ﬂirting with it: when he attempts to explain to his contem-
poraries his hypothesis of the monads, he uses the expression ‘formal atom’
to characterize what he properly intends to denote with the word ‘monad’.³⁶
As formerly in the DAC, in his mature thought Leibniz attempts to reconcile
an atomistic perspective with an anti-materialistic metaphysics.


    5 Themes from the DAC in Leibniz’s mature philosophy

Besides the presence of some ideas that will constitute a substantive part of
the project for the characteristic art later on, and besides an inclination to
mix atomism with a strongly anti-materialistic perspective, we ﬁnd in the
DAC other items clearly recognizable in Leibniz’s mature works as well.
Among them, the following are particularly worth mentioning:

   1) The notion of blind thought;
   2) The distinction between propositions that are eternally true and proposi-
      tions the truth of which is founded “not on essence but on existence”;
   3) A detailed and systematic treatment of the theory of the syllogism.

Leibniz calls ‘blind thought’ (cogitatio caeca) any thought that is developed
essentially by means of words or other symbols. Such a thought is blind

   ³⁵ On the inﬂuence of Neoplatonic doctrines on Leibniz’s thought, see Mercer (2000).
   ³⁶ Cf., for instance, what Leibniz writes in the New System of the Nature of Substances and
Their Communication (1695): “So, in order to get to these real unities I had to have recourse to a
formal atom, what might be called a real and animated point, or to an atom of substance, which
must contain some kind of form or activity in order to make a complete being” (Philosophical
Texts: 143).
        OUP CORRECTED PROOF – FINAL, 28/4/2020, SPi




14     

because by employing words or any other kind of symbols, we do not see our
own thoughts, which remain concealed behind a curtain of material signs,
spoken or written or whatever.
   The category of blind thought plays a prominent role in Leibniz’s mature
philosophy. Even early on during his stay in Paris, Leibniz emphasizes the fact
that human beings cannot grasp directly by an act of intuition any thought
beyond a certain degree of complexity.³⁷ In other words, we are forced to take
recourse to symbols to formulate and to express concepts or thoughts sufﬁ-
ciently complex. We need a language, or at least something like a language,
not only to communicate, but even to develop our own thoughts.³⁸
   The idea that some kind of material tool is necessary for thinking is
pervasive in Leibniz’s philosophy and strictly connected with the opinion
according to which, with the only exception of God, all spiritual beings (even
the angels) are associated with a body (even though a very ‘thin’ one).
According to the Platonic tradition, Leibniz thinks that this ‘bodily part’
prevents any kind of spiritual beings from being directly acquainted with
ideas and thoughts in their ‘purity’, as it were.
   The distinction between propositions that are eternally true and proposi-
tions the truth of which is founded “not on essence but on existence”
foreshadows the distinction between ‘truths of reason’ and ‘truths of fact’
as it is expressed, for example, in the New Essays (1702).³⁹ In the DAC, the
propositions “that are eternally true” are synonymous with “theorems”, i.e.
“propositions that hold not because of the will of God, but by their very
nature”, and are contrasted with “singular propositions” like “Augustus was
emperor of the Romans” and with “observations”, i.e. “universal proposi-
tions whose truth is founded not on essence but on existence”.⁴⁰ In a slightly
different form, we ﬁnd the same distinction in the so-called Monadology:

     There are two kinds of truths, those of reasoning and those of fact. Truths
     of reasoning are necessary and their opposite is impossible, while those of
     fact are contingent and their opposite is possible. When a truth is necessary
     one can ﬁnd its reason through analysis, resolving it into ever more simple
     ideas and truths until one reaches primitives.⁴¹



  ³⁷ Cf., for instance, A VI, 3: 462.
  ³⁸ This does not exclude the possibility that, in certain peculiar cases, we may have direct
acquaintance with some ideas or truths, see Mugnai (2014).
  ³⁹ Cf., for instance, NE: 446.      ⁴⁰ DAC: 177 (A VI, 1: 199).
  ⁴¹ Monadology, section 33 (transl. Rescher 1991: 120).
                                              OUP CORRECTED PROOF – FINAL, 28/4/2020, SPi




                ’                               15

In the New Essays, Leibniz explicitly considers the distinction between
propositions of reason and propositions of fact as ‘his own’,⁴² and in the
same vein as in the DAC, he writes that propositions of fact “can also
become general, in a way; but that is by induction or observation, so that
what we have is only a multitude of similar facts [ . . . ]”. General proposi-
tions of reason, instead, “are necessary”.⁴³
   Finally, the DAC emphasizes Leibniz’s precocious interest in the theory
of syllogism. Even though Leibniz in 1686 had worked out a logical
calculus, which was supposed to include the traditional syllogistic theory,
he never stopped investigating the logical mechanisms governing the
syllogistic doctrine of Aristotelian origin. It is quite remarkable that late
in his life, only one year before his death, Leibniz devoted himself to
writing an essay on the syllogistic ﬁgures, aiming to give a new rigorous
foundation to traditional syllogistic theory.⁴⁴ In the New Essays we ﬁnd an
apology for the syllogism:

   It must be admitted that the scholastic syllogistic form is not much
   employed in the world, and that if anyone tried to use it seriously
   the result would be prolixity and confusion. And yet – would you believe
   it – I hold that the invention of the syllogistic form is one of the ﬁnest,
   and indeed one of the most important, to have been made by the human
   mind. It is a kind of universal mathematics whose importance is too little
   known. It can be said to include an art of infallibility, provided that one
   knows how to use it and gets the chance to do so – which sometimes one
   does not.⁴⁵

Many years before the New Essays, when he began to write the ﬁrst texts on
logical calculus, Leibniz elaborated a very general notion of logically valid
arguments, which includes the traditional syllogisms as a particular case.
This point, too, is clearly stated in the New Essays:

   But it must be grasped that by ‘formal arguments’ I mean not only the
   scholastic manner of arguing, which they use in the colleges, but also any


   ⁴² “The distinction you draw appears to amount to mine, between ‘propositions of fact’ and
‘propositions of reason’.” (NE: 446).
   ⁴³ NE: 446.
   ⁴⁴ This essay has recently been published by Wolfgang Lenzen in Schriften (2019: 428–43).
A partial edition of it appeared in the Leibniz Review, vol. 20, 2010: 117–35.
   ⁴⁵ NE: 478.
        OUP CORRECTED PROOF – FINAL, 28/4/2020, SPi




16     

     reasoning in which the conclusion is reached by virtue of the form, with no
     need for anything to be added. So: a sorites, some other sequence of
     syllogisms in which repetition is avoided, even a well drawn-up statement
     of accounts, an algebraic calculation, an inﬁnitesimal analysis – I shall
     count all of these as formal arguments, more or less, because in each of
     them the form of reasoning has been demonstrated in advance so that one
     is sure of not going wrong with it.⁴⁶


We have thus, with a ‘broad brush’, given a picture of the cultural back-
ground against which Leibniz conceived the DAC; it is time now to enter
into some details concerning the main topics discussed in this work.



             6 The ﬁrst two problems and their solutions

Leibniz begins the Dissertation with the clear statement that his investiga-
tion properly belongs to metaphysics.⁴⁷ Metaphysics, indeed, “is concerned
ﬁrst with Being, and then with the affections of Being”;⁴⁸ and it is on these
latter that the doctrine of combinations rests. Leibniz does not say expli-
citly what he means by the words ‘being’ (Latin: ens) and ‘affection’
(affectio, modus), but tacitly assumes some familiarity on the part of the
reader with these terms and writes that just as affections of bodies (colour,
weight, and ﬁgure) are not themselves bodies, so the affections of a being
are not beings.
   According to the scholastic doctrine (inspired by Aristotle’s Categories),
Leibniz considers the totality of the affections as divided into three main
categories: quality, quantity, and relation. A quality is an “absolute affection
(or mode)” of a being; a quantity is a relative affection “which holds between
a thing and one of its parts”; a relation is an affection, which holds between a
thing and some other thing. If metaphysics is understood as the discipline
that investigates “what is common to all kind of Beings”, then quality,




   ⁴⁶ Ibidem.
   ⁴⁷ As Eberhard Knobloch observes: “Leibniz [ . . . ] spoke of the “ars combinatoria”, a
philosophical term to which he attached different meanings in the course of his life, but
which always embraced more than what we call combinatorics today and was not even
restricted to mathematical problems.” (Knobloch 1974: 410)
   ⁴⁸ DAC: 69 (A VI, 1: 170).
                                              OUP CORRECTED PROOF – FINAL, 28/4/2020, SPi




                                                      17

quantity, and relation, because they concern the most general affections of
all things, belong to metaphysics as well.
   After introducing these three categories, Leibniz recognizes two kinds of
relations: unity and agreement. We have a relation of unity, when several
things are put together to form a whole: in this case, the things forming the
whole are called parts. Leibniz seems to have quite a general idea of a whole,
as something that obtains by simply juxtaposing or adding things together: it
does not necessarily presuppose some kind of intrinsic link among the
parts.⁴⁹ Moreover, Leibniz does not limit himself to considering material
wholes only: on the contrary, he admits any kind of wholes, even immaterial
ones, such as a piece of music or a poetical work. He is quite reticent about
the relation of agreement, probably because it does not play an important
role in the art of combinations. In later texts, written after the edition of the
DAC, the relation of agreement (Lat. convenientia) seems to be not much
different from similarity under some respect. Thus, for example, two ‘things’
agree if they have properties (colour or shape) that are similar or if they
share a similar structure.⁵⁰
   Given a whole, it can be divided into lesser parts and these parts can be
rearranged in different ways. Thus, for instance, let a whole consist of A, B,
and C. The lesser wholes “are its parts AB, BC, and AC; and the disposition
of the smallest parts, or what are taken as the smallest parts (that is, Unities),
can be varied both in relation to each other and to the whole”.⁵¹ Leibniz calls
variation the change of relations (including change of order) amongst the
parts of a given whole (what we now call permutation); and complexion, the
“union of a lesser whole within a greater whole” (what we now call combin-
ation). Loosely speaking, a complexion is the grouping of the elements of
some domain of things (abstract or material), according to a given number:
thus, for example, given a domain of four elements, we have six complexions
of two elements out of them. To indicate that a domain (a whole) made of x
elements must be decomposed into complexions each of n elements, Leibniz
uses the notation ‘xn’ (where ‘x’ is the number of the things belonging to the
intended domain). The disposition of the parts in relation to each other and
to the whole is called situs.



   ⁴⁹ Around 1686, Leibniz will assume that a part should be ‘homogeneous’ to its whole; see,
for instance, A VI, 4B: 1671 (discussion with Fardella (1690)): “because a part is always
homogeneous with the whole”.
   ⁵⁰ Cf. A VI, 4A: 336: “A relation of agreement is either of similarity or dissimilarity.”
   ⁵¹ DAC: 73 (A VI, 1: 171).
        OUP CORRECTED PROOF – FINAL, 28/4/2020, SPi




18     

  After introducing the main notions on which the combinatorial art
should rest, Leibniz proposes a list of problems preceded by a short pre-
amble, which explains how he intends to develop his investigation:

     There are three things that have to be considered: Problems, Theorems, and
     Applications. To some of the problems I have appended an application and,
     where it seemed worthwhile, theorems. Moreover, to some of the problems
     I have added an explanation of the solution.⁵²

Thus, Leibniz considers a totality of twelve problems and a variety of
applications, ranging from the theory of syllogism to some puzzles typical
of recreational mathematics as, for instance, how many ways a given number
of persons could sit down at one table in some order or other. Problems 1–3
concern combinations, whereas problems 4–12 are centred on permuta-
tions. The chapters are of different length and some of them quite dispro-
portionate, when compared to others. As Knobloch remarks:

     The longest chapter (problem 2) alone takes up 28 pages of the Academy
     edition, while the shortest ﬁlls a mere 2 1/2 lines. On the other hand, the
     ﬁnal paragraph following the formulation of the 12th problem refers
     to all of the last 6 problems, whereas the second chapter includes part
     of the ﬁrst.⁵³

Among the applications, the most interesting ones from a philosophical
point of view are those concerning logic and the syllogism, and it is on these
that we will concentrate in these introductory remarks.
   The ﬁrst problem (PROBLEM I) tackled by Leibniz is:⁵⁴

     (I) given a number with its corresponding exponent, to ﬁnd the
         complexions.

Leibniz offers two solutions: one concerning the general case, when the
exponent is any number whatsoever, the other involving the particular
case with exponent 2. The ﬁrst solution sounds quite cumbersome:



   ⁵² Cf. DAC: 79 (A VI, 1: 173).        ⁵³ Knobloch (1974: 412).
   ⁵⁴ To distinguish the main problems into which the DAC is articulated from the problems
internal to the various applications, we write in capitals the ﬁrst.
                                               OUP CORRECTED PROOF – FINAL, 28/4/2020, SPi




                                                        19

   Let the number of complexions of the preceding exponent with the
   preceding number be added to the number of complexions of the given
   exponent with the preceding number; the result will be the required
   number of complexions.⁵⁵

To understand Leibniz’s words, let us put the number of complexions = ‘C’;
the number of ‘things’ to be combined = ‘n ’; and the number of the
exponent = k. In this case, ‘nk ’ denotes all complexions of k elements out
of n things. If we suppose n = 5 and k = 3, then ‘5³’ denotes all complexions
(combinations) of 3 elements that can be made out of 5 elements. Leibniz’s
proposed solution corresponds to the formula:
                                    
          n            n1           n1
 F1 C           ¼ C           þC
          k            k1             k
As this formula shows, the total number of complexions of k elements out
of n ‘things’ is determined by adding the number of complexions of k−1
elements out of n−1 things to the number of complexions of n elements out of
n−1 things. To stick to our example, to calculate the number of complexions
of three elements out of ﬁve things, we must: a) calculate the number of
complexions of two elements out of four things; b) calculate the number
of complexions of three elements out of four things; and, ﬁnally; c) add
together these two numbers. In this case, however, to determine the number
of complexions of k elements out of n things, we need to know the number of
complexions of n−1 things: as Leibniz remarks, to ﬁnd the complexions,
“the complexions of the preceding number are a prerequisite”.⁵⁶
   After having expressed in words the content of (F1), Leibniz proceeds to
construct a table devised as a tool to ﬁnd all possible complexions of k
elements out of n ‘things’, for k and n comprised between the numbers 1
and 12.⁵⁷ It is to this table that Leibniz constantly refers, when he proposes
the solutions to the combinatorial problems formulated in the DAC.



  ⁵⁵ Cf. DAC: 81 (A VI, 1: 174).
  ⁵⁶ DAC: 83 (A VI, 1: 174). The total number of complexions can be found in a more general
and direct way applying the formula (unknown to Leibniz at the time of the DAC):
                                       n         n!
                                    Cð Þ ¼              :
                                       k     k!ðk  1Þ!
   ⁵⁷ As a matter of fact, however, the column with the number of ‘things’ starts with ‘0’, even
though, as Knobloch (1974: 413) remarks, Leibniz “explicitly excludes combinations of no
elements since he gives the number of all possible combinations as 2n– 1”.
